Music Music
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbeville.
The Brazos Valley, and particularly residents of Bryan, know Mike Sutherland for his service on the Bryan City Council since 2006.
Many others, though, know of his 22 and a half years of military service in the U.S.
Army.
One year of that, February 1969 to February 1970, was spent as a chopper pilot in Vietnam, flying some 900 hours of mainly what they called ash and trash missions between Chulai and 80 miles south of Da Nang.
There are some stories to tell of reconnaissance, transport, occasional assault.
After Vietnam, Mike Sutherland spent another 19 years in uniform, ending his military career stationed at Bryan's 420th Engineering Brigade under General Al Jones.
Please welcome Lieutenant Colonel Mike Sutherland to Veterans of the Valley.
Mike, it's a pleasure to have you here.
Thank you for your service.
Wanted to have you on Veterans of the Valley for a long time.
Appreciate you being here.
Thank you, Tom.
I'm glad to be here.
You grew up in Louisiana, born in Shreveport, but you were drafted in 1966.
And I thought it was interesting that even though you had a deferment, you decided to bypass that and go into the army because many of your friends had served and indeed were even wounded in Vietnam.
That's true.
My family in World War II, almost all of them served too, so that was kind of a, I think an unwritten rule that we would serve.
And my mother didn't want me to volunteer, so this was a way to get volunteered is let them draft you.
Right, right.
And you liked the Army.
You got there and you liked the Army, obviously because you spent 22 and a half years there.
Yeah, when I, after the shooting stopped, you know, I found a home there and I liked the methods.
As a matter of fact, I think I grew up in the Army.
what I know and what I based my life on is pretty much what I was taught in the Army.
Right, right.
Talk about leading up to Vietnam, you went to OCS and you went to flight school.
So you volunteered for those things to sort of stay stateside as long as you could, right?
Exactly.
Yeah, I got drafted in October 66 and went to basic training and somebody said, you want to take a test to go to OCS?
And I said, what is that?
And they told me what it was.
I said, I'll take the test.
passed that and went to OCS, and during OCS they said, we've got another test you can take, and it's to flight school.
I only rode an airplane one time in my whole life, but I took the test and passed it, and so I went to flight school, and I went to Mineral Wells from May of 67, let's see, May of 67, no, that was OCS, it was 68, May of 68 until probably the September, and then we went to Fort Rooker after that.
and finished up at Fort Rucker, and then there was nothing left to do.
You went to Vietnam after that.
And you went in country, like we said, in February 1969.
Correct.
Talk about your duty there, your unit there, your platoon there, and sort of the nature of your missions.
I was assigned to the A Company, 123rd Aviation Battalion in the Marikawa Division, and our company supported
the brigade level units and above and that's generally meant some of the platoons flew the brigade commanders and my platoon flew everything that was left over and we called it ash and trash because you flew everything from resupply bullets as one as a matter of fact one time I flew the whole division payroll the helicopter was full of money I mean it was just
Totally full of money.
So it was a varied thing.
Like you were saying earlier, I flew sometimes on assault.
Some of the units were made to have built to carry troops and put them in a fire zone.
Our people were separate.
Our helicopters were separate from that.
But every once in a while, somebody would want to go
into an area where there was a lot of fire going on, so you'd have to join one of those assaults.
And it was pretty hairy because you couldn't talk to anybody, and there was firing all over the place, and there was confusion, so it was pretty bad when you weren't part of the unit itself.
In one year, nearly 900 hours, you did a lot of flying.
Oh yeah, we flew a lot.
There was a lot of flying to do, and we flew everything from... Well, as a matter of fact, I'll talk to you a story about primarily what my platoon did was recon from...
Chulai up to about 80 miles south of Da Nang on Highway 1.
And we flew about 50 feet off of the ground so that the guy hanging his feet out the door could see the ground and had it been disturbed.
And so if it had been disturbed, they called someone to try to find out what it was, if it was a mine or whatever, and clear it out.
And so one day, I mean, one day we were flying that mission and we, for some reason, the grace of God, I drifted away from the road.
And just about the time the guy looking out the door
realized I was too far for him to see he hollered at me said sir get back on the road I can't see and when he said that a bomb a 500 pound bomb went off right where we would have been flying had we not drifted off it it blew our helicopter to the side but you know we didn't nobody was injured and we made it through so but it was one of those things that turns out your mistake saved your life yes sir and you know and I thought when the combat when you got killed you were too close or too soon or too far was always too something when something happened to you so
Right.
You were talking about you flew some at night, and interesting story.
You talked about sometimes flying in from Da Nang at night, and when they tried to identify you, sometimes they'd lose you.
Correct.
Yeah, our navigation weren't the best in the world, and it was really, I guess, the infancy of the helicopter part of aviation.
And we were, as a matter of fact, we didn't have an air corps.
We were, I was an engineer assigned to fly helicopters.
And so at night, we would come back from Da Nang headed towards July.
And we did have some radar and they would try to identify who you were because we couldn't broadcast sometimes friend or foe.
In any case, they would give you a turn.
And if they turned you out over the ocean, you had to be very careful because they could lose you out over the ocean.
And if you didn't know where exactly you were, you'd be lost out in the water.
So you had to bathe very close.
So you couldn't take anything for granted at any time.
Right.
Over the water, I guess that was South China Sea.
South China Sea and that was a deep place.
So you didn't want to go in there.
Now, you flew Hueys and 086s.
Correct.
What are the differences between those two?
Well, the Hueys that we had were used for cargo, transportation of people, and any other kind of recon missions.
And the 086s were, you could fly people, but generally the primary mission of those were to
to fly rocket recons.
And what we would do is we would fly the 086 right at the top of the trees, and sometimes these were at night, and you'd have a Huey with a big light on it that would be shining on the ground, and then above that you would have a gunship.
So the idea was when the bad guy shot at you right above the trees, then the gunship would come in and take care of him, assuming you didn't get shot down.
And the real bad thing of that was when that
that big flashlight went over a hill, you couldn't see anything.
All you could see is where the flashlight was and you couldn't see where the ground was or anything.
We had to muddle through a bunch of stuff like that.
You mentioned the dicey incidents that you were involved in as a helicopter pilot.
One time you talked about a platoon sergeant that was just about through with his tour and he came to you and said that he wanted to fly one of his last missions with you and it turned out that
That one got a little hairy.
Yeah, it was his last time to fly, and I felt bad about it.
You know, you have a feeling, and I said, you know, I don't think you ought to do this.
You ought to stay home.
I mean, you don't have but a week left.
So in any case, so he wanted to fly, and he didn't, the door gunners had an M60 machine gun normally, but he didn't use an M60 machine gun.
He used an M16, a rifle that he held at Port Arms.
And he sat in the well, and we were reconning the road,
and we came to a row of trees, bamboo stuff that we had to get up over.
So I had to raise the helicopter up a little bit to get a little high, and when I did, there was a Vietnamese on the other side with a .50 cal machine gun, and he just filled the bottom of the helicopter up.
and everybody was hollering and screaming, and they were hollering that my platoon sergeant had been killed because he was slumped over in the well, and the guy sitting behind me, the rounds were going up by his feet, and so he was really screaming and hollering.
So we didn't, the first thing you do is to figure out what's happened to the engine, because you've got to have the engine and the transmission to fly and land, so I knew that was okay because I knew what the gauges were like, and I knew in those days, it's remarkable how much you can remember in terms of
your location, wherever you are, because your life depends on it.
And so I knew that we were near a soccer field.
So I made it to the soccer field and landed.
Everything was fine.
But the crew chief, my platoon sergeant, was still out.
So we went back to check on him.
And a round had hit that M16 and hit his chest and knocked him out.
So he wasn't dead.
He was just knocked out.
If it hadn't been for that M16, though,
It's one of those deals he'd been hit.
Yeah, the gun he didn't like.
Exactly.
Yeah, exactly.
But you as a pilot, and you talk about a stress situation, you're hearing all of this.
You're not sure who's wounded.
Is the platoon sergeant dead?
But you still have to keep your head, find out a safe place to land, looking at all the gauges.
So this is where your training really comes in.
Correct, exactly.
And the Army did a tremendous job on our training.
Most of us were, I was 22 and I was in charge of the platoon, but the pilots were between 19 and 21.
So we were all really teenagers, and it was just like we had motorcycles.
We could do anything with them.
Fearless, no problem with them.
there was no mission that was too hard for us to tackle.
Another incident you talked about where you had just come off of R&R and you had a big load and a takeoff situation.
You find things to do as a routine way
that work for you and that are safe for you.
And we had this one LZ that was on top of the hill and we routinely went in there and picked up troops and cargo and they were so heavy that you couldn't hover well so you would move to the edge of the hill and then let the helicopter drift down the hill until you got enough speed to start it flying.
Well, I was gone for about a week on R&R with my wife in Hawaii and came back and we did the same thing.
Loaded it up, started drifting down the hill, got to the bottom of the hill
And the unit down there had put up a large grouping of a telephone wire.
And it was a pretty good size deal.
And so I didn't see it until it was right at eye level.
So the bubble, I mean, I'm sitting in the bubble and the bubble's here and the wires are across there.
And, you know, what do you do?
Do you go under it?
No.
Couldn't go under it because the blade was too tall and it would snap off the rotor.
So then you could try to raise it up and try to go over it, but you didn't have enough speed.
and you didn't have enough power to get over it.
So the only thing I could do was just try to create a situation where it was belly up or skids up and it went to the wires with both skids up and hit the wires and it flipped over and started flying like a slingshot.
But it knocked all the commo out in the area there.
They were so mad at me they could have killed me when I came back.
But we made it.
Nobody got it.
They should have told you about the pants.
Yeah, that's right.
We should have had something hanging on it.
Nowadays, on the helicopters, they have these wire cutters that are on those things, and that's what it's for.
So if you get involved in that thing, it'll cut it and not tear the helicopter up.
And the problem is you have to worry about getting it back too far because the rotor would bend the mast, dent the mast, and it'll snap off.
They train you so well that all this stuff goes through at one time, and you can accommodate it.
I guess through the grace of God, too, but, I mean, make it through.
You talked about sort of the makeup of these chopper pilots, and I think people forget, you know, these kids were 18, 19, 20 years old.
You were a little bit older.
I was 22.
You were an old man in that, but these guys were great pilots, but they were kind of daredevilish, too, right?
Oh, yes.
The main problem for me as the platoon leader is that
They thought they could do anything and they tried anything.
They flew under bridges and flew too low and hit birds and had all kinds of strikes.
And so when they did that, the helicopter couldn't fly on a mission.
So we were always fighting over that.
You know, they shouldn't be doing that.
Fly them so they can make sure they're not injured in any kind of way.
But those guys were great pilots.
I can't say enough about them.
I have a story about that, too.
I had this one guy that was his second tour and he would get mad.
After he came, they thought that when they were done flying, everything was off.
Nothing else had to do.
They didn't have to do anything else.
So he would get mad in the evening, and he would take his, he had a machine gun, and he would shoot his machine gun off in his hooch where he lived.
I mean, shoot it in the floor or at somebody.
So I said, well, you can't do that.
And he said, oh, yeah.
I said, okay, I'm taking it from you.
You can't take that from me.
So I took his weapon and made him check it in and out with me when he left and when he came back.
So that was it.
That was one of those things you just have to deal with.
I mean, it's so, you know, it's so, they're rules, but they're really not any rules.
You just have to watch out and try to solve problems all the time and accommodate people.
You talked about another time near the end of your tour when they usually try to give you relatively safe missions, and there were some tracer bullets that you weren't counting on that were coming at you.
Yeah, we flew a mission around the division base camp.
to drop these large flares that lit up the perimeter for the soldiers that were on guard duty to see if there were enemy coming through the wire, because they wouldn't have any lights or enough electricity.
And we would do that all night long, and I came in about midnight or one o'clock on one mission,
and landed the helicopter.
We hovered into the revetment.
It's an L-shaped revetment, I'll never forget.
It's open on one side.
We hovered in there, and I was on the opposite side that it's open, and all of a sudden, tracers started coming across the nose of the helicopter.
I mean, it was a lot of them.
I don't know how we missed, but I guess he wasn't trying to hit us.
So they went across the helicopter and we all jumped out and started low crawling away from where he was shooting, back away from where we thought was safe.
And so we warned the guys behind us because we had some people coming in behind us that what was going on and not the land.
And what had happened is one of the,
platoon leaders that was behind us had a his member of his platoon was shooting and he was waiting on him to land he was going to shoot him down he had some for some reason he was mad at him I don't remember why but anyway so but they captured him and everybody was safe so we've got some photographs that Mike has provided for us just a few of them to show you there's a there is a young
wide-eyed Mike Sutherland.
About how old were you in this picture?
I was probably 20 there.
I was a private then.
That was when I got drafted.
That was a photo.
That's right.
No ribbons or medals on that guy.
No, that wasn't been after you up all night and so that was the first photo in Normie.
This is a, I put this in here because this is one of our UH-1s and it has that pelican on the front of it because in those days we decorated our helicopters.
That was kind of like in World War II.
Yeah, like the nose art in World War II.
Exactly.
And our call sign was Pelican.
And not only that, but we used the same call signs all the time.
And the Viet Cong finally figured out who we were because we used like Pelican 6 would be the commander.
So they knew exactly who we were because they could listen to the radios.
And we didn't change our call signs.
We didn't start doing that until the latter part of 79 or 70, rather.
And this is a picture of in Vietnam in a helicopter.
I'm the co-pilot there.
That white helmet, you know, we had white helmets when we first started when I was there.
You know, that makes a very good target.
You can't see anything with that white helmet.
So somebody said, you know what, that's a real good target.
Take that off and get a colored one.
So anyway.
Yeah, that's why they invented camera.
It is the same thing.
This was, we all had nicknames.
What's on the back of that helmet is Louisiana Swamper as my company.
That was my nickname in Vietnam.
And we'll talk about this later, but you had a desk job.
Yeah, well, this was when I came back from Vietnam, the Army did the firefighter training for all the services, and I was in charge of the company that did the firefighter training, and that was a helmet that somebody gave me from PIS, Germany, I think it was.
I see.
It was there on the desk.
So where were you?
That was at Fort Rucker.
In Fort Rucker.
I did training at Fort Rucker.
I came back and was assigned to Fort Rucker, Alabama.
Alabama.
Right, exactly.
Right.
Great pictures.
Thank you.
Before we leave Vietnam,
There was an incident that you talked about, I guess this would have been New Year's Eve of 1969, where a fella got a little out of control, had a little bit too much, and it became a very scary incident for you.
Yeah, on New Year's Eve, I happened to have, that would have been,
69.
Right.
Going into 70.
Right, exactly.
And I happen to have officer duty, officer day duty.
Anyway, so they came and got me about midnight when everybody started.
We had lots of colored flares and stuff that the guys would shoot off and tracers and all that stuff.
It really looked like fireworks.
I mean, they shot so many of them.
So they called me from one of the bunker areas that there was a soldier standing behind the bunker line and he was drunk and he was firing
on automatic into the bunker line, where our people were in the bunker's garden area.
And so I went up there to him, and I realized I knew him, so I said, I called his name, and when I called his name, he turned the M16 Omni on automatic.
He didn't shoot it, but he just pointed at me.
And so, you know, I said, we gotta talk about this, you know, because all I had was a .45, and there was no place to run, and it was just, there was no win situation for me, so.
I said, you know, you need to put that down because somebody's going to get hurt.
So I talked to him for a few minutes, and he said, well, you're going to court-martial me.
I said, oh, no.
I think this is one of the few times in my life I lied.
I said, no, not worry about it.
I will take care of it.
So I saw him.
He did put it down, so we got him, handcuffed him and all that stuff.
About a month later, he'd been court-martialed and had to go to jail, and for some reason I saw him.
And he said, you told me that nothing was going to happen to me.
And I said, that's correct, but you had an M16 on me on fully automatic.
And I feel fully justified in telling you that, too.
So neither one of us got killed.
That was fortunate.
12 months in Vietnam.
I came back in February of 1970.
We saw that picture at Fort Rucker, where you went to an engineer battalion there.
Right.
And then the Little Rock, Arkansas, where you were under a Colonel Downs.
That's exactly right.
Ben Downs' uncle, I found out recently.
It's amazing.
It's a small world.
Yeah, I was in the computer job there and I did, in the navigation department, I did, wrote and converted computer programs for the engineering work that they had to do.
And I was in the engineering department and I worked for, I mean, I was in the computer department and I worked for
Colonel Downs, he had me do a study of the computer department on how to be organized.
So I set that up for him before I left there.
And so it was really interesting.
Ben Downs, of course.
I can't imagine anybody doesn't know Ben.
Ben is my boss and general manager of Bryan Broadcasting and WTAW.
And I know that he's very proud of his uncle.
Oh, yes.
Service.
And you all had a chance recently to talk about that.
Germany for four years, where you served as not only a community commander, company commander, but XO for those four years.
That was...
It was an interesting service.
It was cold.
You spent 200 days out on the field to begin with.
That was in the days of the Cold War and what we were doing there is training
to stop the Russians from coming across the German border into West Germany.
And our organization was responsible to go up to the full of the gap and put out as many mines, any tank mines that we could as possible.
We practiced all kinds of ways, putting those mines out.
We threw them out and we did all kinds of things.
And we also were responsible for tank ditches to keep the
If you dig a tank ditch the right size and right place, they couldn't cross it.
And we also had to blow the bridges as we came, as we fell back.
So we put the mines out, dug the tank ditches, and then blew the bridges as we fell back through the area to keep them from coming.
They were going to Frankfurt's where they were going and on to England.
But I found out later
after I retired from army read Reagan's book that in some of the secret conversations they published that that the Russians plan was to nuke that area where we were and drive through but depth so we were then fried you know so I don't know who would have slowed down but anyway that was I'm glad it never happened that's right because we had to get not only that we had to get all of the
We had all of our civilians there, all of our families were there too, so we had the plan to, we were up front, and the families were evacuating from Germany.
Right, right.
You said that when you were there is when Reagan was elected, and they were pretty excited about that because Reagan was pretty tough on the Soviets.
Right.
During the campaign, Reagan was the only candidate that said that we've got to stop the Russians.
We called them the evil empire.
And the Germans at that time in West Germany, they were in a critical position because the only thing that kept them from speaking Russian was that the Chinese was on the other side.
And if the Russians had made a move across the border, it was assumed that the Chinese would come across too.
So that was kind of a blocking force for them.
So I was, at that time I was a community commander or the deputy community commander
And I was meeting with Germans, and when they found out he got elected, they were all cheering.
It was a wonderful thing for him.
And things changed a lot for the Army then, too.
We didn't have a lot of money and didn't have a lot of assets, and he changed it around.
He pumped a lot of money into the Army system.
From Germany to back to the stateside, Fort Leavenworth in 1981, what was your degree to do?
And there I was doing research and development.
My systems were chemical and nuclear systems.
And I worked for Colin Powell there.
He was my boss.
Really?
My one boss up.
And I had to brief him quite a bit.
He was a great guy.
But anyway, we worked on some of the systems.
That was in 81, and they used some of those systems that we were working on in
testing in the early 90s in the Desert Storm Desert Shield.
Some of the engineering system and the chemical both.
Right, so as early as 81.
It takes that long, the research, the development of it and all of that.
And finally, to a place called Bryan, Texas in 1984.
And you were sort of on the giving end of what you had been of the receiving end in Germany.
Your duty at the 480th.
Yeah, as we discussed, the Germany
and the defense of Germany for the Russians was that once the Russians attacked, the reserve units would be deployed to Germany, called Reforger, and they would assist us in blocking the Russians.
Well, and the 420th was one of those units.
They were tasked with being those Reforger units to deploy to Germany, so I helped them, I worked in that area.
We primarily worked on training and getting them up to speed on the current systems in their army,
how to fight, but now it's a lot tougher on them.
They have to go every 18 months or so to Iraq, Afghanistan.
You mentioned that you served under Al Jones, the former Brazos County judge, and of course he had a distinguished military career.
What do you remember of General Jones back then?
Well, he was the commander when I came in, so he was my, like,
door to the civilian world too.
I'd been on the post for 17 years, and we'd been strictly in the military for 70 years.
Really, the civilian world was not, at that time, not really something I was familiar with.
So he kind of got me accustomed, and I'll never forget, the first thing he took me to was a bonfire.
So we stood out there in the middle of the field, and I didn't know anything about Aggies, and stood out in the middle of that field, and it was muddy.
and we watched that outhouse burn and fall.
And I said, sir, you know, if you drive 50 miles from here and told somebody tomorrow that you stood out here at midnight and watched the outhouse burn, they'll think you're crazy.
But I had no idea how widespread that was.
So then in 1984, it was, well, 89, excuse me.
84 is when you came to Bryant.
In 89, it was time to move again, but you had a family that didn't want to move.
Your wife, Tana, was going to school at the time.
You had kids in school.
They wanted to stay.
Right.
It was time to retire from the service.
Yes, there was no good combination we could make.
I didn't want to leave her here by herself with three teenage boys, and we didn't want to leave one by herself as a senior, a Mrs. Senior in high school and all that.
So we just had a family meeting and came to the conclusion it was time for me to do something and not them.
So I retired, and at that time, it was tough because the economy was pretty bad in 89.
It was really bad.
But anyway, we made the best of it.
Whatever it took to do the job, we did it.
Went into the insurance business?
Correct.
Stayed there for 20 years and just sold my last agency and maybe that'll be the last one.
Of course, your service on the Bryan City Council, I know that that's something you love, plus your volunteer things that you do.
But we talked a little bit about city council.
Certainly don't want to turn this into a forum of any kind, but just sort of talk about how the military training helps you as you sit and serve the people of Bryan on the council.
There's obviously, that goes hand in hand.
Yeah, thank you for bringing that up.
The military, although we were steeped in combat and combat procedures,
What makes the military run is staffing and staff actions and doing your homework and making sure that
that you've got the details figured out and that they're all laid out on the table so that the commander, the guy making the decisions, can make the right decision.
Not the decision you want, but the one that's produced by the evidence that's presented.
And that's the same thing with our city operation.
We have to know all the details of what's going on, but in this case, it takes four of us to make a decision, but it's still the same process.
Staff has to be in good, they have to be good, they have to be able to articulate, and they have to do their homework.
And I enjoy that part of it.
I enjoy helping the citizens when they need assistance and that really keeps me motivated.
So staff probably knows that they're working for a military guy.
Well, I don't mind asking questions.
Let's say that.
That's great.
We mentioned your volunteer work.
We've got about a minute left.
And I know one thing that you're very involved in is helping head up the Veterans Day Parade that we have in downtown Bryan every year, which is just a fantastic event.
And that's sort of a labor of love.
It's an overused term, right?
Absolutely.
We just did our eighth one.
And that involved from the Rotary Club.
some programs and people wanted to do more than just programs at the Rotary Club, so the Rotary Club agreed to do that.
And we've had as many as 2,000 people watching and about 500 or 600 people in the parade.
It's not large because I want to keep it under control and make sure nobody gets hurt.
And it's for the soldiers.
It's not for the governor to be here or some politician to be here.
We honor the veterans of our area.
That's what it's all about.
Mike, we're out of time.
Thank you very much for your service and thanks for everything that you're doing for the city and your volunteer work.
We appreciate you being here.
Well, thank you for doing this.
I really appreciate it very much.
Mike Sutherland now serves his community, not only as a council member, but has volunteered with such organizations as Boys and Girls Club, Elder Aid, BB Casa, MAD, and the Red Cross.
He and his wife, Tana, have three children and are proud grandparents.
We thank him and all veterans for their service.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
Thank you.